Add GraphQL API (#51)
Automattic/vip-block-data-api: README.md

Reviewer: Do we need to add documentation here if they want to use GraphQL?

* How to turn it on
* What other plugins are necessary
* What the output looks like

Reviewer 2: A documentation section on WPGraphQL integration makes sense! First, so users know it's supported, and I also think some code snippets for these would be useful:

- An example WPGraphQL query
- An example response
- Maybe a small amount of Node.js code that can be used to reconstruct a block hierarchy

None of these need to be huge examples, I think just a nested block or two as an example. Maybe a `core/list` with two items?

Author: Great point, and something I neglected while trying to move this out of draft status.

Author: I have revamped the README to add in the graphQL details, so check it out. What's missing is the node utility to reconstruct the block hierarchy, which I am working on. I'll have that by monday.

Author: The utility function has been added as well! I tried to simplify it further, but ran into some recursion problems so decided to leave it as it is. This can be updated further in an another update if we want.

  <img src="https://github.com/Automattic/vip-block-data-api/blob/media/vip-block-data-api-animation-830.gif" alt="VIP Block Data API attribute sourcing animation" />
</picture>

> The Block Data API is an API for retrieving block editor posts structured as JSON data. This API is available as a REST, as well as a GraphQL API. While primarily designed for use in decoupled WordPress, the Block Data API can be used anywhere you want to represent block markup as structured data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Block Data API is an API for retrieving block editor posts structured as JSON data, with integrations for both the official WordPress REST API and WPGraphQL. While primarily designed for use in decoupled WordPress, the Block Data API can be used anywhere you want to represent block markup as structured data.
```

</tr>
</table>

### GraphQL

> The GraphQL API, requires some setup before it can be it can be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The GraphQL API requires some setup before it can be it can be used.
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed in https://github.com/Automattic/vip-block-data-api/commit/fac6ebf59e071e5db10234cabe951f7db1d4894f.

#### Setup

> The Block Data API integrates with **WP-GraphQL** to provide a GraphQL API as well. As a result, it is necessary to have WP-GraphQL installed, to activate the GraphQL API. To do so, follow the instructions mentioned [here](https://www.wpgraphql.com/docs/quick-start#install). 

Reviewer 3: There isn't a separate step to activate the GraphQL endpoint, it's just plugin activation. Also linking the word "here" is a pet peeve (and bad for SEO). :)

```suggestion
The Block Data API integrates with **WPGraphQL** to provide a GraphQL API. It is necessary to have WPGraphQL [installed and activated](https://www.wpgraphql.com/docs/quick-start#install).
```

Reviewer 2: Agree, addressed in https://github.com/Automattic/vip-block-data-api/pull/51/commits/fac6ebf59e071e5db10234cabe951f7db1d4894f!

> Once WP-GraphQL has been installed and setup, a new field called `blocksData` will show up under categories that support `ContentNodes` like posts, pages, etc. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once WPGraphQL has been installed and setup, a new field called `blocksData` will be available for post types that provide content, like posts, pages, etc. 
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed in https://github.com/Automattic/vip-block-data-api/commit/fac6ebf59e071e5db10234cabe951f7db1d4894f.

#### Usage

> The `blocksData` field would be the field through which block data would be returned under a category that supports it. 
> 
> An example of what a query would look like for a post:

Reviewer 3: Category has a different meaning in a WP context.
```suggestion
The `blocksData` field provides block data for post types that support it. Here is an example query:
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed in https://github.com/Automattic/vip-block-data-api/commit/fac6ebf59e071e5db10234cabe951f7db1d4894f.

```graphQL
query NewQuery {
  post(id: "1", idType: DATABASE_ID) {
    blocksData {
      blocks {
        id
        name
        attributes {
          name
          value
        }
        innerBlocks {
          name
          parentId
          id
          attributes {
            name
            value
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Here, the `id` and `parentId` fields are dynamically generated, unique IDs that help to identify parent-child relationships in the `innerBlocks` under a block, in the overall block structure.The resulting `innerBlocks` is a flattened list, that can be untangled using the combination of `id` and `parentId` fields. This is helpful in being able to give back a complicated nesting structure, without having any knowledge as to how deep this nesting goes. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here, the `id` and `parentId` fields are dynamically generated, unique IDs that help to identify parent-child relationships in the `innerBlocks` under a block, in the overall block structure. The resulting `innerBlocks` is a flattened list, that can be untangled using the combination of `id` and `parentId` fields. This is helpful in being able to give back a complicated nesting structure, without having any knowledge as to how deep this nesting goes. 
```

> In addition, the attributes of a block are a list of `name`, `value` pairs so as to avoid having to figure out the type of each block. This allows giving back any block's attributes.

Reviewer 3: To be fair here, it doesn't avoid having to figure out the type. The consumer is likely going to need to do exactly that and perform type conversion. You might want to discuss the trade-offs of this decision here.

```suggestion
In addition, the attributes of a block are a list of `name` / `value` pairs so as to avoid having to figure out the type of each block. This allows giving back any block's attributes.
```

Reviewer 2: Good idea! Put a small ["Block Attributes" section](https://github.com/Automattic/vip-block-data-api/blob/fac6ebf59e071e5db10234cabe951f7db1d4894f/README.md#block-attributes) with an example and explaining the trade-off.

  <!-- /wp:list-item -->

  <!-- wp:list-item -->
  <li>This is item 2 in the list</li>
  <!-- /wp:list-item -->
</ul>
<!-- /wp:list -->

<!-- wp:quote -->
<blockquote class="wp-block-quote">
  <!-- wp:paragraph -->
  <p>This is a paragraph within a quote</p>
  <!-- /wp:paragraph -->
</blockquote>
<!-- /wp:quote -->
```

</td>
<td>

```graphQL
query NewQuery {
  post(id: "1", idType: DATABASE_ID) {
    blocksData {
      blocks {
        id
        name
        attributes {
          name
          value
        }
        innerBlocks {
          name
          parentId
          id
          attributes {
            name
            value
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</td>
<td>

```json
{
  "data": {
      "post": {
          "blocksData": {
              "blocks": [
                  {
                      "attributes": [
                          {
                              "name": "ordered",
                              "value": ""
                          },
                          {
                              "name": "values",
                              "value": ""
                          }
                      ],

>                       "id": "1",

Reviewer 3: Use example Relay IDs?

Reviewer 2: I think I'm leaning toward keeping these as simplified IDs for the example. Actual IDs returned from GraphQL look super similar (`SUQ6MQ==`, `SUQ6Mg==`, `SUQ6MTY=`) and that gets in the way of demonstrating the connection between blocks and their parents. I tried subbing in some real values, but without easily visible relationships the code is a lot harder to follow:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "post": {
      "blocksData": {
        "blocks": [
          {
            "attributes": [
              {
                "name": "ordered",
                "value": ""
              },
              {
                "name": "values",
                "value": ""
              }
            ],
            "id": "SUQ6MjE=",
            "name": "core/list",
            "innerBlocks": [
              {
                "id": "SUQ6MTk=",
                "name": "core/list-item",
                "parentId": "SUQ6MjE=",
                "attributes": [
                  {
                    "name": "content",
                    "value": "This is item 1 in the list"
                  }
                ]
              },
              {
                "id": "SUQ6MTg=",
                "name": "core/list-item",
                "parentId": "SUQ6MjE=",
                "attributes": [
                  {
                    "name": "content",
                    "value": "This is item 2 in the list"
                  }
                ]
              }
            ]
          },
          {
            "attributes": [
              {
                "name": "value",
                "value": ""
              },
              {
                "name": "citation",
                "value": ""
              }
            ],
            "id": "SUQ6MTY=",
            "name": "core/quote",
            "innerBlocks": [
              {
                "id": "SUQ6MQ==",
                "name": "core/paragraph",
                "parentId": "SUQ6MTY=",
                "attributes": [
                  {
                    "name": "content",
                    "value": "This is a paragraph within a quote"
                  },
                  {
                    "name": "dropCap",
                    "value": ""
                  }
                ]
              }
            ]
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Reviewer 3: Got it, but the API will return Relay IDs, right? That's important since many client implementations used IDs as cache object identifiers. Using `int`s will result in collisions.

Reasoning makes sense, you could also put the decoded ID in a comment, like

```
"id": "SUQ6MQ==", // "BlockData:1"
```

But good either way

Reviewer 2: That's correct that these are Relay IDs, and I agree that assuming integers could cause some issues. I tried out your ID commenting suggestion but felt like that also made the example too busy. Settled on a note underneath the example in https://github.com/Automattic/vip-block-data-api/pull/51/commits/90c77dedc6472b01e70226dfd4529b358a011fd4.

</div>
```

### Utility function to reconstruct the block hierarchy

> The purpose of this function is to take the flattened `innerBlock` list under each root block, and reconstruct the block hierarchy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The purpose of this function is to take the flattened `innerBlocks` list under each root block, and reconstruct the block hierarchy.
```

The logic is as follows:

1. Go over each block given back.
2. Go over each block's `innerBlocks`.
   * For each `innerBlock`, check if the `parentId` matches the `id` of the root block.
   * If yes, add that `innerBlock` to a new list.
   * If no, go over the newly constructed list and repeat step 2's logic as the block could be nested under another `innerBlock`.

This logic has been split over two functions, with the core logic (steps 1, 2a, 2b) being in the function below and the recursive case (2c) being handled in the second function called `convertInnerBlocksToHierarchy`.

```js

> const blocks = payload.data?.post?.blocksData?.blocks;

Reviewer 3: blocks is possibly undefined
```suggestion
const blocks = payload.data?.post?.blocksData?.blocks ?? [];
```

## Code Filters

### GraphQL

> ```php
> /**
> 	* Filter to enable/disable the graphQL API. By default, it is enabled.
> 	* 
> 	* @param bool $is_graphql_to_be_enabled Whether the graphQL API should be enabled or not.
> */
> apply_filters( 'vip_block_data_api__is_graphql_enabled', true );
> ```
> 

Reviewer 3: It's a little odd to include the `apply_filters` definition here, which isn't relevant to usage. I would remove it

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Good point, removed here: https://github.com/Automattic/vip-block-data-api/blob/fac6ebf59e071e5db10234cabe951f7db1d4894f/README.md#graphql-1.

To disable the GraphQL API, the following can be done:

```php

> add_filter( 'vip_block_data_api__is_graphql_enabled', function( ) {
>     return false;
> }, 10, 1);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
add_filter( 'vip_block_data_api__is_graphql_enabled', '__return_false' );
```
